You agree?
If she wishes, just take away question from us.
Yeah, fair enough. Very good.
Okay, I'll, um, I'll take questions away from Lauren.
Well, they, they're on the same,
Same footing.
So Jeffrey, welcome you.
Thank you very much for coming
and, um, helping us to piece through, um,
our own thinking as a committee on this.
Uh, I'll hand over to you,
but as you can see, um, a number of committee members have,
uh, questions for you.
So you ask time for that.
Well, um, I, I, you were all young
long ago when I was in this parliament, these
questions of regulation were
begg in those days.
We had the economic stabilization Act of 1948
that allowed everything that moved to be regulated, uh,
without resort to parliament at all.
Uh, and that was done as,
as Sir Robert Muldoon once famously told the times
of London, if you hang your hat on economic
stabilization, you can do anything.
And he did. We had
all wages regulated at one stage, all interest rates
and even carless days.
Now, you are all too young to remember that,
but I can tell you that is executive government, the like,
of which we've never seen before.
That led me in the second edition of Unbridled Power
that was published in 19
and 97 to
cause those laws that we had.
We, we had made lot of use of delegated legislation
for many years.
The distinction that was made between
before primary legislation
and delegated legislation was secondary legislation was
vital to this whole discussion.
And I was very pleased
to hear the legislation design committee.
I, I chaired the pre it's pre desist of that committee.
Um, and, um, when I was at the Law Commission, now,
let me say that the Economic
Stabilization Act, the Commerce Amendment Act of 1979
and various other, the National Development Act
that allowed you to develop New Zealand by order and council
and not by parliament.
These were very grave exercises
of executive power.
And that led to the repeal
of all those statutes.
And it also led to the setting up on this committee,
which was part of the Labor Government's policy
for the 1984 election.
And the committee got to work
and was pretty active for a long time.
And it had bipartisan support.
And when this, I won't characterize it
in unfair terms,
but with the regulatory standards bill
appeared in this parliament, it was exceedingly difficult
to understand what it was going to try and achieve
because it seems, uh, if you look at the 75 page
regulatory impact statement, you find even
that the officials of the minister's own department
didn't agree with the bill.
And indeed, one of the reasons why they might not have,
there was nothing said about the Regulations Review
committee in, in the legislation,
or indeed, as far as I can see in any of the consideration
that led to the drafting of this Ill considered Bill.
Now, the, the truth of the matter is that
the disallowance of regulations, which is what the aim
of this legislation, the regulatory standards bill purpose,
is to reduce the amount of legislation, not directly,
but indirectly, by producing a lot of reports
that don't have legal effect,
but which are given to people who
do have decision making capacity.
Uh, and, and of course that is, uh,
a bit like the Chinese water torture.
You will have a lot of reports coming
and you'll get nervous about it if you're a minister.
And indeed, it, the, the, the effect of the, of the bill,
uh, is to, it's, it's actually designed
to split ministerial responsibility.
Ministers are responsible for the secondary legislation
that they administer from the primary act.
And I think the suggestion that the, this leg,
that the regulatory standards will be restricted
to primary legislation's, entirely sound,
otherwise, you're gonna have a confused miss.
The, the conduct
of this parliament already pretty unsatisfactory in many
points of view, uh, is going to get a whole lot worse
when you have this, these confusing areas of responsibility
that don't fit.
And I thought the previous speaker was extremely tactile the
way he put that, but I'm telling you
that confusion is the worst thing that you want.
And and I, I have to say
that the power to disallow is
not exercised very often.
And one of the things that worries me about that is
it leads to people saying that regulations are too frequent.
Because when they are made, they're not disallowed
as the Parliament has the power to do
and has had for many years.
Uh, that was another part
of the Labor Party policy in my day
to set up the Regulations Disallowance Act,
and it's not used much.
And why isn't it? I'll tell you the reason.
There's a lot of jurisprudence with the regulation,
with the Regulations Review Committee.
It's even published at the university.
It's been over a period of years, developed quite well.
The bad habits of New Zealand legislation have been somewhat
restricted, uh, by the activities
of this committee, but not enough.
Now, the difficulty with the,
with the new bill is that it promises far too much
and it cannot deliver it
because it's a vast amount of, let me just go
through the amount of law that we now have on the books.
It's astonishing.
We have, um, uh, amount of law, which, uh,
which the Parliamentary Council has, uh, has
said is it's
2 5 4 2 5 4 5 8 2 3 4
pages of primary legislation.
That's millions.
It's 25 million
that comes from Parliamentary Council now,
and most of it is, uh, public act.
Although there's a whole lot of provincial legisl, uh,
provincial council stuffs still on the books.
If you're gonna get rid of legislation, you have
to have a policy of doing it.
And it's very time consuming,
and that's why it's not done enough.
And to, to remove unnecessary statutes from the book,
you need to give a job to the Law commission
and get them to research whether they're still needed,
what the legal effects would be if they were
not, and get rid of them.
But that has never been done
because New Zealand, which loves passing law,
even when it's not necessary, uh, wants
to pass more law all the time,
but never get rid of the law that it has.
And that leads in an old democracy like this
to a considerable set of problems that you have to manage
and they are unmanageable.
Mm-hmm. And, and if this, if this legislation
of from the regulatory standards bill goes,
what I don't know how the legislation advisory committee is,
is, um, I, I don't know
how the regulatory standards bill is ever going to
coordinate with you.
It's impossible. Mm-hmm. Now, that leads me to this.
If the aim is to
curb primary legislation, that is one thing.
If the aim is to curb secondary legislation,
that is another thing.
And I think the secondary legislation is the one
that will create the most confusion
because of its new, the number of regulations
that are made it, I haven't given,
given the figures for that.
They're enormous. You cannot run
a country on the basis of primary legislation alone.
It is not possible.
And the ministers have to be able to have the ability
to have administrative arrangements
that are within the competence of the
enabling provisions in the primary act that allows detail
to be dealt with, because you can't do everything
by primary legislation.
So I just think
that the disallowance provisions are highly relevant
to the whole enterprise of the regulatory, uh,
standards bill, and, and they need to be made part of it.
And, and if you, if you are left alone, that would be good.
But what you need to do is to be more muscular.
If, if we are going to have economists complaining
without any evidence being profit,
that there is too much regulation,
then you are the people to stop it.
The reason it isn't stopped is that ministers don't like
that because it means that they're not able to, to,
uh, do what they want to do.
And ministers like to be able to do what they want to do
because they think that's why they're there.
And that's true. So, so you see, I,
I just can't see, I can't make any sense of the mess
that is now in front of you in this parliament.
It is absolutely irresponsible if, if, if,
if there is not some policy changes made to try
and actually deal with the problem,
not the Ima imagined problem.
The Parliament has the power right now in the legislation
that is, that used to be the Regulations Disallowance Act,
but which is now contained in the legislation Act 2019 part
four, to disallow a whole range
of statutory regulations.
Now, you know better than I,
you don't recommend it very often.
I saw you did it the other day for a legal, a legal, um,
education partly deserved it, um, about legal education.
The more Parliament keeps out of legal educ the better.
Uh, but let me say that, uh, I, I would say that there is,
there is just a lot of work to revise
what is being done here.
It's not to create a great big mess
and part of the mess is for you.
Yeah. And,
and so I, I just, uh, wanted to give you that background
because having worked in this area
and regarding it regarded as important, uh,
important long ago, it somehow hasn't stuck.
Uh, the idea that these these powers have never
exercised worries me.
Why would Parliament give powers to itself
to disallow a whole lot of stuff and never, never do it?
And that might make the economist of this world
who don't have a good understanding of law better
might make them feel better about the Parliament.
There are four questions already for you. Can we move
Right where you go First?
I'll come to Joseph Mooney.
Oh, Thank you, sir Jeffrey, uh, for that, um, uh,
submission and, and, uh, for that background as well.
Uh, and, uh, I think, uh,
you touched on an interesting point that's I've reflect on
that we come to this place to be more makers.
Yes. Therefore, there's our metric of success,
but not more pruners. Yes,
Yes, absolutely. Point, because
There's an interesting point there.
Um, and you, you, you may
or may not be pleased to know that, uh, I did recently file
that motion of disallowance, which was debate in the house.
It was disallowed. So, so, but they could do that.
You could do it all the time.
Well, there's, so don't you. We'll take it on board. Yeah.
I Love it. Now, I'm, I'm interested with your, uh,
your, your understanding of the, the background
of the history of this place,
and particularly the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
Yeah. That you have great familiarity with.
And some of the, we've heard from, uh,
legislation advisor Design Advising committee.
It's, um, the, the jurisprudence that's developed
that was unexpected at the time that the New Zealand Bill
of Rights Act was put in place.
Now, interesting thing, the New Zealand Bill
of Rights Act creates a number of principles
or rules that we want society to Yeah.
Abide by. Uh,
but it also has an Attorney general needs provide a
report on Yes.
Back to Parliament. But Parliament can ignore that
and it regularly does across governments.
Yes. Uh, so with this bill, um,
that we now considering this
and its intersection with our committee,
I'm interested in your thoughts about, uh, how Juris may
or may not develop over time, um, given what happened
with the New Rising and,
and the reporting function that gives to Parliament,
but also the ability to parliament to ignore
that reporting function.
Yeah. So we're having a, I don't know,
what's the 25th anniversary?
The Got Rights Act in Canterbury in 1st of October.
And it was, they asked me to tell, tell 'em what I thought.
I think it should have been entrenched,
and I still think that Mm.
And, um, if you're going to have human rights,
then you should honor them.
And, and the idea that you're going to be able to, uh,
somehow slough off it
because of the, uh, what the features of the world rights
that you've mentioned, I don't agree with that.
I think in the small democracy with the executive,
as powerful as we have,
and that cannot ever be fixed
unless the Parliament is bigger.
And that's not a popular thing to do.
The theory of Westminster government is that the
cabinet is responsible to the House of Representatives,
but the House of Representatives is so small
that you have ministers chair chairing select
committees when they shouldn't.
And we stopped doing that.
And, and now it started again
because you've got an executive
that's got about 23 members in it.
Um, and, and,
and so it's, it's just, it's just
people just want to be ministers.
They don't want to be back benches here.
They don't want to do the work of, of scrutinizing
because it's not sexy politically and you don't have power.
It just happens to be very important.
And, and these fundamentals
of Westminster government are entirely, um,
absent from the New Zealand political psyche.
Uh, and, and this is a very small country, and,
and it's gonna get itself into big trouble if it goes on the
way it is with the way it legislate.
Don, I'll just supplementary. Okay.
Just, just on on that though, the, the, um,
New Zealand Bill of Rights Acts has
very important principles.
Yes. But there's also, I guess some
of the concerns have been raised about this bill
currently we're considering.
Yeah. And as a section with our committee is that there are
a broader range of public policy issues
that this may constrain,
but that isn't that the same issue with the New Zealand Bill
of Rights Act, that there's a broader range
of public policy issues that may be difficult to reconcile,
that therefore Parliament does have the opportunity to,
and does ignore reports
of inconsistency from the Attorney General?
Um, well, yes, but the courts don't.
Uh, and that's the difference.
The trouble with the regulatory responsibility bill is
that the courts are written out of it all together except
where the warrants are to be ordered to get material
for this strange committee that is being set up.
Uh, and, and the, the, I don't see that
as the same thing.
You to have a statute passed that is law for some purposes
and not per us, is a very novel provision.
And it's received very little attention by the people
who examined this bill
because the economists don't understand law.
That's a defining aspect of being an economist.
So I just think that you really do need to look at
what the Law Society said about the bill.
The Law Society gave it a real,
and it really deserves it.
And, and to, to certain ignore that is, is really worrying.
I'll come to Dr. Nan.
Thank you so much, chair,
and thank you so much, uh, CVI Palmer
for being with us today.
Um, one of the things
that this committee is really grappling with,
and I think I've said that and,
and you know, previously we've heard as well, is
where do we fit within this new structure?
Uh, and I think there are two aspects for that.
Number one, like, as you pointed out,
and maybe the simple solution is in RSB,
secondary legislation should just not be included.
That's right. And that make it really clean. Yeah.
But if it were to retain the way it is right now
for both primary and secondary, from our perspective,
what we haven't been able to get clarity on is, number one,
the overlap between the roles.
Who has the final say?
Is it RRC
or is it the regulatory standards board
being one part of my question.
And the second part of my question is, hold on. Can we start
With that? Can we do it one at a time? Yep.
Uh, the regulatory standards board
is a creature of the minister,
and it is not a creature of parliament.
This committee is a creature of parliament
and members of this committee have the right to move
regulations to be dis.
Mm-hmm. And they can be,
and that seems to me to be the answer to most
of the difficulties that arise with secondary legislation.
And, and, and that, that is a very important thing
for the committee to grasp.
Because if you don't have a purpose,
you will cease to exist.
The committee was much bigger.
I seem to recall when we started, it's,
it's quite small now,
and I doubt whether the members want to serve on it much.
'cause it probably doesn't have glamor, uh,
even though it's important.
Uh, and, and, and the difficulty with that is that
you put there to do a job to protect the public.
And, and, and the executive is not the final arbital the
house is, but you have power in that
to move motions.
Yeah, that's right. And,
and that's not something that the, that the strange
body that they're gonna set up, they don't, can't do that.
But what they can do is to like leaves
and autumn put them on ministers
and make the ministers very nervous.
Dr. Nan, do you have a second? Yeah.
So, um, thank you so much.
And I think it is true, I might,
I'm not an official member of this committee.
I'm here purely for the enjoyment of it.
Well, you ought to get on it. Oh,
I love it. Um,
Dr. Sorry, the second question is, uh, around the fact
that this, regardless of what it's, this committee looks
to build consensus in most.
Yes. Yes. Always has done
And always has done.
And he looks and it's cross party, you know? Yes.
'cause like you said, it's Committee of Parliament,
but what we're seeing is the lack of independence
and potentially transparency with
what is considered a comparable board as well.
Do you see that there is a possibility where that,
how this committee does things is able to be translated into
what the regulatory standard board could possibly be
as something that is independently appointed as opposed
to No being part of the minister.
It's either a parliamentary body or it isn't. Okay.
Uh, and, and it has no legitimacy, but isn't, yeah.
Uh, and, and the legitimacy, uh, comes from being
in the supreme rule making body,
and you are the guardian of ensuring that the law,
making power is not abused by the executive,
and the executive can abuse it.
Uh, they used to abuse it a great deal by trying to ensure
that deemed regulations, I don't know, you know,
anything about the history of deemed regulations,
but that was a terrific issue for many, many years.
I think it's gone away more or less now.
But you see, it's, it's the failure to, to do things
properly that this committee is, exists to, to
prevent and stop.
And there hasn't been enough stopping. Mm.
And, and, and, and that is
because ministers
who design regulations don't want them to allow,
and so they won't vote for that.
Yeah. And often the,
the ministers have the power in the house.
That's the problem. Mm.
And, and so I think that the, the bipartisan thing
that is necessary to make the committee work properly needs
to extend the back benches from the governing party, feeling
that they can exercise their judgment
without fear or favor.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Because that is the way you see,
coming back to the regulatory standards, bill, I heard
the minister on the, uh, on a podcast once say
that they would all be the, the members of this, uh,
council, whatever it's called, uh, would all be economists.
Well, that would not be appropriate,
because if you don't believe in
regulation, and a lot of economists
just want unright of capitalism,
but regulation is designed
to have some checks
and balances against unbridled capitalism.
That is its purpose. We have to have capitalism.
Of course not, some people don't think that,
but it's the only way
to generate wealth in any effective way.
But you can't have it without controls on it.
And and that's really at the essence of this whole debate.
And, and it's, it's, it's a debate
that's got off on the wrong tack.
And I thought that's why the officials didn't agree
with their own minister,
even though their ministry had only been recently set up.
They didn't agree with him. And he's got another line of it.
And, and I, I don't, can't see
that the parliament should count.
They, you need to have harmony with both these things.
The point should have been made since I've been here
by you are quite right.
You have a responsibility.
It's an important responsibility
and you ought to exercise it,
but it needs to be gelled into the system
because you, it's not sitting out there in
left field somewhere.
And, and I just, I just cannot understand
how the parliament ever got itself into
this position. Mm-hmm.
I'll come, um, a quick question from Miles Anderson
and then whenever she Walters a quick question from
me and then we'll be at time. So Jeffrey,
Be pardon? We,
We've only got time for
three more questions. That's all right.
So, um, I just want you to walk us back
to the time this committee was formed.
Yes. Mm-hmm. Um,
and that would be, um, in the 84 85 8.
Yes. That, that period. Yes.
And through that period, were there any disallowance then?
Uh, as far as I can remember,
there's only been three or four ever.
So, but, but, but I think that could have been,
Because what we do do,
which in defense of this committee Yeah.
Quite often we identify poorly written, um,
secondary legislation and then that's then ti it up
and referred back to us. Yes.
That that's quite right. And you've done a lot of that.
And the thing is, you don't have
to disallow it if you've corrected it, do you?
Correct. Yes. And, and, and that's gone on.
And that was the purpose. But,
but you see the, the, the, the purpose of the authors
of the regulator responsibility bill don't seem to think
that that does any good.
It does a lot of good.
And that's the, the jurisprudence of this committee is long,
it's 20 or 30 years long.
And, and, and it's used
and it's especially used by government departments.
'cause they are the ones who cop the
criticism from the committee.
Mm. And, and, and so they should and, and,
and so I think that's great work.
But that seems to me to be the main explanation
for why Moore haven't been disallowed.
That's right. I think, um, by identifying
for secondary Yeah.
Legislation and it's generally amended
to fix that Yeah.
Um, issue, which then leads the question why you think we
should be disa allowing more?
Well, well, well, if the case is that we're overregulated,
is it because of the regulation of the secondary legislation
or the primary legislation then
and from the take, take the economic stabilization act
as a classic example, I, that was
certainly excessive and should have been, should have.
Not in a free society, you can't have an act that,
uh, you just can't.
And, and, and, um, the way we haven't got many acts like
that now, but,
but the, the enthusiasm for
terrific deregulation makes me nervous.
I don't quite know where that desire comes from
because it, the evidence has not been put in front
of this parliament about why it, how it is.
It's asserted, but it's not generated as evidence
anywhere that I have seen. Mm-hmm.
P Walters, thank you
and thank you committee for allowing me to ask a question.
I'm also not a regular member.
I'm just here to having a chat with you, Jeffrey. Oh, okay.
Um, I can feel your exasperation. Yeah.
Um, and I think firstly a comment, one thing
that there isn't a lot of commentary on is the deeply
constitutional thing that the bill does,
which is insert the manner
and form provision that requires the statement
of consistency Yes.
To be, um, to be filed along
with the introduction of the bill.
Yes. Um, which I think the clerk spoke to,
but yes, my other concern,
The Clarks uh, Clarks submission submission I read
makes a very good point.
And, and I, and I guess my question
for you is I think there's another interesting
constitutional issue that sits between the Bill
of Rights Act and this bill.
Um, so if things remain as they are,
there was an argument at select committee
that the bill itself is discriminatory
or indirectly discriminatory.
No, I agree with That. Um, and so if that's the case
and, uh, the ability of secondary ledge remains, um, open
to being interpreted in accordance with the principles.
Yep. Could a declaration
of inconsistency case be brought against the bill
as it passes into legislation?
Because both, both, both point to each other in many ways.
Um, and my sense is that
There's a bit of a constitutional black hole
almost sense point.
Well, the, the parliament, the, the courts are not going to,
uh, interfere with legislation.
I was going through parliament that they will not do no, uh,
and, and cannot do.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and there's plenty of recent authority of that
cook said it 10 or 15 years ago,
but should it pass into law?
Well, if it passes into law, that's different.
And when it's passed into law,
I don't think there's any chance of avoiding
legal cases then despite what the bill wishes to do,
it isn't going to work.
It's a piece of, um, it's a piece of
we don't like the courts
because we think the courts might not do what we want,
so we won't allow them into this.
And I find that deeply unconstitutional
because we have three branches of government
and the great protection for the ordinary people.
And that is that you have the executive,
you have the legislature, and you have the judiciary,
and they all have a role to play in these things.
And you cannot write the judiciary out of it
and call yourself a democratic society.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so Jeffrey, we are at time,
let me ask you a quick question.
We find ourselves in the position where we are one
of the only two cross partisan, genuinely cross partisan,
uh, committees in the Parliament.
And, uh, both of those committees are called to determine
what will be in the standing orders
at the end of this parliament.
Yeah. About the role of Regulations review committee.
The other is the Standing Orders Committee.
Um, as the chair, I would like to progress usefully
for the standing Orders committee, what the role
of the Regulations review Committee Yes.
Is now, um, we are, we are struggling to find consensus.
Give us some advice about how we should embrace
that initial sense of bipartisanship
with which you established this committee.
Well, I think if you took the l d's first point
about keeping
the statutes separate from the, from the, uh,
secondary legislation, that's the beginning
of wisdom on the point,
because the statutes are the ones
that cause the problem really.
Uh, and, and when it gets down to secondary legislation,
it's, it's not, it's not as bad.
Even though there's much more of it, it's not
as deeply offensive as such provisions sometimes.
I mean, it used to be put in statutes
that the minister's decision will be fun
and you know, that the minister can decide.
And he likes all that sort of, you can't do that anymore.
But they, I've seen it done and,
and it hasn't been done for a while, but,
but I, we have tolerated
strong, powerful,
unified central government in this country for a long time.
The Australians don't have anything like that. Mm.
Okay. Thank you. Um, thank you so much for joining us.
Thank you for being so generous. Well, I
Hope I wasn't a trouble.